[swh.cli.subcommands]
swh.lister = swh.lister.cli

[swh.workers]
swh.lister.arch = swh.lister.arch:register
swh.lister.aur = swh.lister.aur:register
swh.lister.bioconductor = swh.lister.bioconductor:register
swh.lister.bitbucket = swh.lister.bitbucket:register
swh.lister.bower = swh.lister.bower:register
swh.lister.cgit = swh.lister.cgit:register
swh.lister.conda = swh.lister.conda:register
swh.lister.cpan = swh.lister.cpan:register
swh.lister.cran = swh.lister.cran:register
swh.lister.crates = swh.lister.crates:register
swh.lister.debian = swh.lister.debian:register
swh.lister.dlang = swh.lister.dlang:register
swh.lister.gitea = swh.lister.gitea:register
swh.lister.github = swh.lister.github:register
swh.lister.gitiles = swh.lister.gitiles:register
swh.lister.gitlab = swh.lister.gitlab:register
swh.lister.gitweb = swh.lister.gitweb:register
swh.lister.gnu = swh.lister.gnu:register
swh.lister.gogs = swh.lister.gogs:register
swh.lister.golang = swh.lister.golang:register
swh.lister.hackage = swh.lister.hackage:register
swh.lister.hex = swh.lister.hex:register
swh.lister.julia = swh.lister.julia:register
swh.lister.launchpad = swh.lister.launchpad:register
swh.lister.maven = swh.lister.maven:register
swh.lister.nixguix = swh.lister.nixguix:register
swh.lister.npm = swh.lister.npm:register
swh.lister.nuget = swh.lister.nuget:register
swh.lister.opam = swh.lister.opam:register
swh.lister.packagist = swh.lister.packagist:register
swh.lister.pagure = swh.lister.pagure:register
swh.lister.phabricator = swh.lister.phabricator:register
swh.lister.pubdev = swh.lister.pubdev:register
swh.lister.puppet = swh.lister.puppet:register
swh.lister.pypi = swh.lister.pypi:register
swh.lister.rpm = swh.lister.rpm:register
swh.lister.rubygems = swh.lister.rubygems:register
swh.lister.sourceforge = swh.lister.sourceforge:register
swh.lister.stagit = swh.lister.stagit:register
swh.lister.tuleap = swh.lister.tuleap:register
